And so when I first saw it, I might like,
I started my career as a hypnotist and I,
I saw this guy performing at university and I, uh, I just thought I'm going to,
I'm going to do that. I just, I, I didn't realize at the time,
all these boxes that it was ticking, you know, performing that sort of,
you know,
need for affirmation and love and center of attention and also the control
aspect of it, you know, the kind of, um, uh, yeah,
the control aspect and also the kind of people that,
particularly the sort of guys that would respond well to hypnosis and come up on
stage and, you know, I'd respond well to,
it tended to be exactly the kind of guys that would have really intimidated me
before. So that was later at an unconscious level.
And I hope I've grown out of that now mainly, but, uh, yeah,
it ticks a lot of it ticks a lot of boxes. So that was, that's how I started.
And yams definitely driven by insecurity because at Eddie's any sort of magic,
which sort of followed for me on from the hypnosis,
you're basically it is the quickest,
most fraudulent route to impressing people. That's, you know,
the subtext is only, you know, look at me on Tigray,
which is not that interesting after, after a while. So I've tried to, you know,
as I, as I've grown up, I've tried to move it into a different area.
And one that's a little more resonant than just showing off.
That's fascinating that you started out doing it hypnosis shows at a comedy
show.
No, it was sort of, um, I would mainly perform it.
Like, uh,
colleges and I do a demonstration and then have questions and often, uh,
questions and answers afterwards. And I wasn't making people look stupid.
It was an entertainment show and I guess it was kind of funny, but it was, um,
it was, uh,
it was just a really interesting thing and the trouble with doing it onstage
is of course it gets mixed up with people just kind of playing along and stuff.
So it's, but if you take that out of it,
it's just a really interesting era and I've done this stuff for, you know,
20 years back home, and I'm not, I don't think of myself as a hypnotist.
That was just kind of where I, where I started. But the,
that the suggestion based techniques of that is something I've continued
with and brought into different areas. And I still don't fully understand it.
You know, now it's, there's,
you can have a quiet climates inside someone's head and know what they're
experiencing. Like I used to do in the,
when I used to do these like stage hypnosis shows. The last thing I did was to,
I tell these people on stage that I was invisible. Right. And I'd,
I'd float something through the air, right?
Like this bottle I've got here and it's normally something bigger,
like a chair and they'd be freaking out, you know, running off stage and so on.
But afterwards when I'd have this kind of Q and a I'd, um, I'd ask them, well,
what was your, what was your actual experience? Like,
like the show's over and I'll be honest, what were you,
what were you experiencing? And you'd get some people that would say, well,
yeah, you were obviously just floating that you were just holding it,
but I kind of felt like I had to play along and then you'd get this interesting
air in the middle of, of like, well, I kind of, I, now, when I think back, yes,
of course it was you, but it was, and I sort of knew it was you,
but I emotionally just completely,
I could only experience it as a terrifying floating bottle or whatever it was.
So that's a bit like an actor, like getting caught up in a role. I like,
they know, they know they're onstage and it's a character, but nonetheless,
emotionally committed.
And at the other extreme people that would not accept that it was me floating.
It just, they, that must've been on a wire or something. There's no,
there's no way that I can drop you back at the picture,
in my memory of that thing. So how do you know, how do you,
how do you judge what that experience is when there's, and,
and all those people that are saying, no, you are really invisible.
Are they just saying that because they want to be like the best subjects in
that, in that group. I mean, how do you tease it all apart?
That is the, is that, that must be a real issue, right?
The people that just want to please you and are playing along,
how can you tell when, if you were hip and dicing.
People? Yeah, I can tell, but I, the way I use it now is kind of,
I use it quite sort of subtly in the show.
I don't like overtly, you know, hypnotized people. Um,
so that means it can mean one of two things. It either means it just,
I'm not interested in people playing along because I'm not just trying to create
the effect of someone hypnotized.
They need to genuinely be responding to this thing in order for the next bit to
work. Uh, in which case I have to filter out anybody playing along,
but occasionally, occasionally it doesn't matter. Like a lot of the time,
like I'll get people up on stage and I'll shake their hand.
And there there's a rapid handshake induction that the guidance know just falls
to the floor. Um,
and there are times that that matters and they have to be,
that has to be a really honest response.
Other times I can tell they're sort of half into it and they're just a bit
intimidated. And, but for the 2000 people looking that might look,
they kind of might look like the same thing. And then how does that exactly.
Does that work? The handshake induction, it's a, uh,
I take no responsibility for explaining this to your tens of millions of
listeners and viewers. Um, but, uh, it's, it's, you're,
you're interrupting a, an automatic process, right? This is the,
this is the key to it. There's made popular by, um,
made popular by it. I guess, Richard Bandler,
who's the guy behind NLP and so on. Um,
I don't know if he kind of created this thing, but perhaps, uh,
perhaps Erickson did before him. I dunno. Anyway, you, you,
you take an automatic process and you interrupted in the middle.
So like when you're shaking hands with somebody,
that's such a familiar process that when you start, you're not thinking, okay,
I'm going to grip this person's hand now,
and I'm going to move my hand up and down with them a few times,
then I'll take my hand to what you just kind of do it automatically.
And there's something about interrupting that, that leaves people
really flummoxed and the world is because they're really,
really caught off guard.
Like if you imagine somebody comes up to you in the street and says,
it's not half past seven, you know, your reaction isn't to go, yeah,
I know it's, uh, 20 past nine, your reaction is, is a sort of,
you think like you've missed something like you're trying to make sense of it.
It's a strange, uh, kind of puts you on the back foot.
And at that point, if you,
if you've got somebody who's fairly suggestible and people coming up on stage,
it's such an odd moment for them. Anyway,
they're naturally very suggestible that a clear instruction to sleep or
whatever you want to give them tends to be taken very deeply.
And very often you'll see I'll shake hands and I'll,
I'll break the pattern at the handshakes. Well,
I'll often take their hand and lift it up to their face and say sleep and show
them their hand like that. And they just sleep and well, it's not sleep,
but it's a kind of, um, it looks like, I mean,
they they'll do anything from eyes closed, head drops down to just drop like a,
like a dead weight on the floor. You know,
I found this most interesting actually was, um,
like applying this in slightly more useful everyday situations was as a sort
of, um, like a self-defense technique. I was walking, uh,
between. So I was like, it must've been like 20 or something.
And I was at a magic convention and I was walking from one hotel to another and
I'd dress it like a three-piece velvet suit as a skinny British,
I might as well have, you know, punched me in the throat,
tattooed across my face. And this guy comes up and he's like, he's drunk.
It was about three in the morning. Drunk, aggressive is with his girlfriend,
clearly looking for a fight. And, uh, he sort of,
he comes up to me and he says, well, what are you,
what are you looking at when you're looking at?
And because I'd spoken about this, how to deal with this sort of thing,
but it never found myself in this situation.
I kind of had it all mentally rehearsed. So I said to him,
I said the wall outside my house, isn't four foot high.
And I guess there's an equivalent to this with a sort of adrenaline dump.
I think it's called in a, in martial arts, but there's a, it just like,
he's got all this adrenaline and then a thing like that for me,
which is just out of context, like, it makes sense.
I'm not like talking jibberish. It makes sense, but it's just out of context.
Right? So now suddenly his thinking I've missed something. So now he,
he was sort of, he went what, and I said, his girlfriend walked off and I said,
well, the wall outside my house, isn't four foot high.
I spent some time in Spain, the walls that were very high.
But if you look at the ones here that they're tiny. Yeah. Nothing.
And then he just sort of broke down and he sort of went what.
Ha and, uh, start crying what you.
Eat. No, it wasn't quit crying, but it was just, it was like all the stress,
the rental and everything just, just flooded out of him.
And he sat down and I ended up sitting next to him on the, uh, like, you know,
on the roadside, um, asking him, you know, so what I was,
the plan was I was going to try and stick his feet to the floor and I had his
whole plan and he just kind of collapsed and sat down. Yeah. That was the,
I knew it'd be like this highly suggestible state and like either way,
the moment of aggression passed, but I ended up,
ended up really sitting with him,
asking him what had happened that evening and his girlfriend,
I think she'd bottled somebody or something horrible had happened.
So we'd got out with all this aggression, but it's a, it's a good one. Isn't it?
If you just have like, um, it could be just a song lyric or just some,
some weird kind of thing that you can just go into in those situations. I mean,
if someone's running at you with a knife, it's a bit difficult, but you just,
you, you're kind of strangely taking control of a situation.
Otherwise what you're going to do, if they say, what are you looking at?
You can't, there's no way you can answer that without being on the back foot.
So it just kind of nicely kind of inverts the situation and puts them on the
back foot, which anyway, it worked, it was, uh, it was kind of.
Fun.
Isn't there like a process required to hypnotize someone.
You could just do it that way and saying it didn't just talk them through some
sort of a program that makes them think their foot is stuck to the floor.
I, it, it all depends on the moment I had,
I used to hypnotize people in my, um, in my room when I was a student. Right.
So I was the guy that did hypnosis. I'd have people coming, you know,
regularly coming to try it out. And, um, I, this,
this one time I used to leave people with like, if they were responsive to it.
And this was like, I was really early days. It was like, you know, 20 minutes,
half an hour of relaxing somebody,
and maybe suggesting that their hands were getting light and floating or heavy
and they couldn't lift them. So it kind of, you know, kind of basic stuff,
but I would leave them if they were very suggestible with the instruction that
when you come back, if I click my fingers, you'll go back into the sleep state.
And they, you know, they kind of get conditioned to that. And it, you know,
it'll often work even like a week later and this guy came and, uh,
I thought I'd seen him before. I thought he'd been on a previous week.
So he sat down and went, okay, look at me and sleep, click my fingers.
And he went out, whatever that means. Right. And then we did whatever it was.
Maybe, you know,
perhaps he wanted to stop smoking or his hands floating in the air or whatever
it wasn't at the end of it.
I realized in talking to him that I hadn't met him before. So then I'm like,
well, how did, how did, why did you respond to me clicking my fingers?
Because I don't have magic fingers.
There's nothing like anything going on here other than,
and I realized it was just that it was just that moment of my kind of confidence
with it.
And the fact fortuitously that he was also very suggestible and put those two
things together. And that's what made it work. It was just that,
that psychological moment for him that was more important than the nature of the
20 minute script that I'd been learning and using up to that point.
So that was kind of a semblance of Seminole.
Your confidence in that he had already been under yeah.
Question it because I believed he had. And so it just kind of,
it just sort of happened. And then he just,
if he hadn't been a suggestible type, then it probably wouldn't have worked,
but luckily he was, and that kind of really, really changed the way that I, uh,
that I, you know, thought about hypnosis and also started this, you know,
this realization that ultimately my, my kind of toolkit with what I do is,
is the stories that people are telling themselves. That's, that's kind of,
that's really, you know,
all there is even a magician showing you a card trick is just getting you to
tell yourself a story, edit,
edit this event in such a way that you go, oh, you know,
I picked a card and then it disappeared. And it was, it was in my pocket.
He never went near me. And you edit out all the bits that don't seem important.
Like when he complimented you on your jacket earlier on in the day and may have
stuck a card in there,
or the bit where he took the card back for a moment or whatever.
Cause you don't, you know, you're, you're,
you're being sold a story with particular sort of edit points.
And you know, to me, that's interesting cause that's what, that's what life is.
You know, we have this infinite data source coming at us and we can, we just,
we have to kind of reduce it to stories to make, to make sense.
I think stripping aside,
all the kind of vaudeville and tacky associations of hypnotists and magicians
and so on.
I think there's something there's something interesting at the heart of it.
I think that, that our storytelling capacity is kind of
endlessly fascinating.
Well, it's fascinating in that regard,
but it's also fascinating that it seems there seems to be like some cheat code
to the human mind. Like there's a,
there's a way you can like lock into like an admin panel and all of a
sudden you're, you're doing things like telling people,
they don't really don't want to be smoking or putting them into this hypnotic
mindset by just snapping your fingers and saying sleep like it's odd.
I don't think, I don't think it is that I think.
It looks like that. And that's the problem because it looks, it it's,
you so often see it when performers are doing it.
When they're often going for a kind of theatrical effect.
If you go and look at it like a clinical environment where hypnosis is being
investigated, it isn't like that at all. Um, it's much more, uh,
kind of boring in a way. It doesn't, it doesn't have any theater attached to it.
It's much more on, you know, kind of intuitively understandable.
But like been hypnotized herself. I'm terrible.
I'm a really bad, really bad subject.
I had one experience where I only one when I was, um,
in like a workshop thing that I was there is like a, you know, uh,
paying a person. I wasn't giving the workshop. And, um,
I was sat with, uh, the, the exercise was, it really worked for me.
It may work for others. So you're split into pairs. And, uh,
the idea is you start to describe a scene. So you sat up, sat with this woman,
you close your eyes,
you start to describe a scene and you go back and forth adding details. Right.
So she says, oh, okay, I'm laying on a beach. And um,
so I just imagined that like, okay, now I'm going to beach and I can, um, I can,
uh, feel the warmth of the sun on my face.
So I'm just kind of like imagining it and joining him at the story.
And then I just remember somebody goes, okay, guys, time up time for lunch.
And I, I S I had been on a, behind beat on a beach and I had completely just,
I'd been there like a dream. It was completely real.
At some point it had tipped into that.
That's the only experience I've had of it. Other than that,
I don't respond to it. I'm just not, I think it's just,
it's just suggestibility. It's something about, uh,
and we get it when you know, where you would get it.
When a doctor gives us a placebo and we respond to that because this authority
figure is giving us that, or, or the way we absorb, uh,
opinions of people that we admire and experts that we admire.
How we just more easily take those on board on questioningly.
This is all the same thing. It's just suggestion. Um, the trouble is,
is it most of the time it's done through the,
the world of the performing hypnotist, which isn't, doesn't,
isn't giving really a very clear and fair view of what's of what's going on.
Because it's so theatrical. And so.
Often you, you know, you're,
you're relishing and things like I click my fingers and this guy went to sleep,
but that's not really, you know, the, what are they doing there? Are they just,
I think just kind of, cause you've just asked them to,
and they know that when you click the fingers they're supposed to go to sleep is
there's a real range of possible experiences that you might look like a power,
but it doesn't mean it is. They might just be.
Just complying. I don't.
I was going to do some of this stuff on stage without using the hypnosis to
show that this,
I don't think there's anything that happens under hypnosis that can't be done
without. Uh, and I was, uh, having this discussion with my friend,
Andy, who directs and co-writes my stage shows with me. And, uh,
I was saying like that thing of, you know, when you,
when a hypnotist gets someone to eat an onion and says, you know,
this is a classic hypnotic, stung gives them a raw onion and says,
it's a delicious, juicy apple. Now eat it and enjoy it.
And you get somebody munching into an onion, like having no problem eating it.
I was like,
I'm sure it feels like if you're just going to pull it off without hypnosis,
would that just happen anyway? And Andy said, I bet,
I bet you can just do it anyway. And he went to my fridge, took out an onion,
took a big bite of it and it was fine because he's right.
So he's proving a point there, right?
So he's in a different mental state than somebody going go on a day to take a
bite of that onion when suddenly you're like, you're preempting the, you know,
the disgust and, uh, all the reasons not to do it. Yeah.
But the fact that he was just going, I bet you can do it.
And trying to prove a point, man, you did it. And it was fine. So that,
that was a different mental state worked that wasn't hypnosis,
but the end result still,
if you do that on stage and pretended to hypnotize somebody first,
it would look like you've done something amazing. So yeah, I dunno.
Is it it's it's to me, it's just,
it's just that story that someone's telling themselves. Well.
It didn't, it did, it tastes like an onion to him or did it, but it.
Just it's just, it would have no, no, no, no.
It would have tasted like an onion. There was no suggestion about the way.
The people that are monetized. Does it taste like an apple to them? Well.
I dunno, it's like in money and invisible, what are the, what are they seeing?
I think for some of them it will, you know, taste and pain and things like that.
And discomfort, it's all very subjective,
but the end result of doing this thing that looks like it couldn't happen
without some magical process. That's the key.
And none of these things really demand that matter, even when,
even when you look at people being, um,
undergoing surgery through hypnosis and being wide awake and being cut open.
And so you think, well that must be evidence.
That hypnosis is some special thing, cause that couldn't happen otherwise.
But of course it can, you know,
the layer of skin that feels pain is actually sort of quiet thin.
So once you get through that, when you're moving organs around, that's not,
that's not a painful process. Anyway, plus very often we tend to use a bit,
a little bit of like a local anesthetic anyway,
just to numb the very top layer of skin. So again,
what looks amazing very often, isn't, it's a,
it's an endlessly rich and bizarre area to me.
And I kind of, um, as I said, I don't really think of myself as a hypnotist,
but th the, that process, that kind of, uh, um,
ability for people to get into this space where they can have
that kind of experience is, um, is something I, you know,
I'll always find interesting. One of the recent stage shows I did, uh,
it's called miracle. I don't know if you've seen it,
but I'm faith healing in the second half.
So using exactly the same idea and I've, I've got an audience that are like me,
you know, they don't believe in that. And I'm just saying, look, I'm, you know,
I'm an atheist, I don't believe in this either,
but will you just kind of go with me or at least at the start because the
results are, are really interesting. And I, um,
I just started doing this, this, um, slightly,
not really knowing if it was going to work. I thought, well,
I can get some adrenaline going. And I know could see the techniques that the,
the charlatan faith healers were using. And, uh, I thought, well,
I'll just, you know, I'll, I'll do that. And I thought, well,
the adrenaline kills pain so I can get some adrenaline going.
There's bound to be people that said, oh,
I had a pain in my back and now it's gone. But the actual results, admittedly,
with like small percentages of the audience, right? Not everybody,
but the people that were coming up and saying,
I have this problem and now it's gone. And they were,
there was a woman that had a,
she'd been paralyzed on one side of her body since a kid.
And she's like in her forties, now she's in floods of tears going,
I can move my arm. And this was,
this is a skeptical audience like me that know that there's kind of playing
along with something and a nonetheless again, small percentage, not, not,
not everybody, but having, having these kinds of experiences. Uh,
it is so that's, that's the psychological component of suffering, which is yeah.
Which is,
which was really eyeopening during that show night after night after night.
Well.
Faith healing is gotta be a form of hypnosis. Right?
Exactly. It's the same world is playing. They both,
well they're both joined by is, is the idea of suggestibility. And, uh,
it doesn't, and sometimes those healings are sort of, I mean,
if you take an x-ray before and afterwards, nothing's changing,
but in as much as a lot can depend on this psychological component, it can,
can really make a difference again, as the percentages are getting smaller.
So 3000 people in the audience, 300 people come up,
10 people come up on stage and I'm, you know, involving them in the show,
but getting even smaller,
there are people that like a year later we're getting in touch and say,
just so you know, that thing did actually clear, like it hasn't come back.
Cause I thought it would only last for 10 minutes while they're on stage.
And then yeah.
Which is why you don't tell people to throw the pills away and so on. Right.
But AC we're in probably like that half a percent now,
which is always going to be kind of pretty extraordinary. But, um, uh,
it was like a real, a real thing. So still.
If you had 200 people and one of them actually gets cured from that,
that is immensely bizarre.
It's immensely bizarre, but it's, it's bizarre. And, and um,
like I had this bad shoulder for a long time and I, uh, I got really used to,
when I put a jacket on kind of putting this in my left arm, putting it in,
like letting my left arm go dead and then using my right arm to pull that thing
up right now. I don't know how much I really need to do that anymore,
or whether I'm just doing it out of habit.
But if somebody got me up on stage and said, your left shoulder is healed,
it's happened now and kind of made me feel a bit, well now gone, try it,
try and move your, move your arm.
I think in the surprise of it and the sheer kind of just snapping out of
that habit of being like, this is my dead arm.
I probably would be very surprised that I could actually move it as much as I
can. You know, it's, it's just, it's like when you break it down, it's like,
not that amazing, but when you, when you, when you see the, the,
the kind of extreme and exciting ends of that, it's,
it is mind blowing. And then you realize how these performance,
how you start to go mad yourself and think, well,
I've got this special gift and I could pack out stadia doing like, uh,
I did think at one point, why don't I do like a secular healing show?
I could say, well, this is, it's just, you know,
it doesn't work in everybody and it may only work seven minutes,
but it certainly works in some meaning of the word. Anyway,
I didn't do that, but you know, you can start to go. Yeah,